# Why openness benefits research

The following text is jointly authored by David Shotton (david.shotton@zoo.ox.ac.uk) and Heinrich Hartmann (hartmann@uni-koblenz.de).

Transparency is essential for trust and credibility in the research
community, and true openness brings great opportunities for
academia. The internet facilitates the free flow of information and
knowledge, and permits new forms of communication both for researchers
and for the general public. Already, today’s children can listen
freely on the internet to university courses taught by world-leading
scientists, and everybody has the best encyclopaedia ever written
(Wikipedia) at their fingertips.  These are real game
changers. Opening up the research literature is the next logical step.

## Open publishing

<img title="Books - by Hash Milhan's" src="http://1.1.1.2/bmi/heinrich-hartmann.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/936394705_3de472288a-300x180.jpg">

We believe that the current academic publishing model – whereby
researchers give their content to commercial publishers and then buy
it back from them at enormous cost by means of journal subscription
fees – has become absurd, since it is no longer helping the researcher
to distribute his or her findings, but rather prevents the work from
being widely read, by hiding it behind subscription pay walls.  Would
it not be much better to let this information flow freely, accessible
to everybody who wants to read it!

Of course, such a vision of openness for academic publishing raises
issues of finance and quality control – who will pay for open access
publishing, and how can we ensure that scientific rigor accompanies
open publication.  While the internet enables dissemination of
information at a fraction of the cost of traditional print
publication, publishing clearly involves more than electronic
dissemination.  It is for this reason that we, with others, are
presently planning a high level conference on modern scientific
communication, entitled **[Rigor and Openness in 21st Century
Science](http://rigourandopenness.org),** to be held in Oxford next spring.

However, new publication funding models are being developed,
particularly in the United Kingdom, where Research Councils UK and the
Wellcome Trust are insisting that papers reporting research results
obtained as a result of their research funding should be published
under an open Creative Commons CC-By attribution licence when an
article processing charge (APC) is levied, so that the works are
freely available for text mining and re-use [1].  What is significant
is that they are backing their words with funding to enable it.
Cameron Neylon has recently written a commentary in Nature about the
importance of this [2].

Furthermore, peer review is being carefully examined by several
forward-looking publishers to determine how well open alternatives to
the present system of confidential review actually work.

## The role of social media in science

Much academic research is done in relative isolation, because topics
have become so specialized that there may be only a few experts in the
whole world who really understand each particular research problem.
These experts may be located on different continents, and may not know
about one another – a situation that is particularly true for
Ph.D. students and other young researchers, who may not yet be
familiar with the literature in their field, and who may have formed
few personal relationships with colleagues in other institutions
through attendance at research conferences.  New forms of academic
social media can play a role here, to catalyse interactions between
geographically separated academics, and many experiments in this area
are being conducted.

Academic social media can also play an important role in filtering the
wealth of new articles published every day, and in alerting people to
the small fraction of these that are most relevant to them.
Typically, junior researchers rely on recommendations from friends and
colleagues about which articles are worth reading, but if academic
social media can be used to broaden this recommendation network, they
will provide a significant service.

## Fears and benefits of openness

Of course researchers, particularly early in their careers, are
cautious about sharing their discoveries too early or too widely, for
fear they may get ‘scooped’, since they naturally and quite properly
wish to obtain credit for their own work by being the first to publish
it.  However, what is often missed by people of this mind-set is that
working openly with other people can have benefits too.  It can be a
lot more fun, can lead to more sustainable motivation, can result in
incredibly rapid collaborative progress, and hence can often lead to
better results.  An essential pre-requisite for this is the
willingness to share one’s ideas and making contact with like-mined
people.  An example of a researcher who practices openness in his
day-to-day research is Georgio Gilestro, Lecturer in Systems
Neurobiology with the Department of Life Sciences at Imperial College
London, who publishes his research group’sOpen Lab Book online.

Our personal experience, not at least in the joint Open Citations and
Related Work developments described in the next blog post, is that you
gain more than you loose by being open!

# Reference

1. Wellcome Trust announcement: Open access: CC-BY licence required for all articles which incur an open access publication fee – FAQ. Available from [www.wellcome.ac.uk](http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/stellent/groups/corporatesite/@policy_communications/documents/web_document/WTVM055715.pdf).

2. Cameron Neylon (2012). Science publishing: Open access must enable open use. Nature 492: 348–349.  doi:10.1038/492348a.